Intel Arc B580 review: A $249 RTX 4060 killer, one-and-a-half years later
Intel has solved the biggest problems with its Arc GPUs, but not the timing. 
Intel doesn't have a ton to show for its dedicated GPU efforts yet.

After much anticipation, many delays, and an anticipatory apology tour for its software quality, Intel launched its first Arc GPUs at the end of 2022. There were things to like about the A770 and A750, but buggy drivers, poor performance in older games, and relatively high power use made them difficult to recommend. They were more notable as curiosities than as consumer graphics cards.

The result, after more than two years on the market, is that Arc GPUs remain a statistical nonentity in the GPU market, according to analysts and the Steam Hardware Survey. But it was always going to take time—and probably a couple of hardware generations—for Intel to make meaningful headway against entrenched competitors.The new Arc B580 card, the first dedicated GPU based on the new "Battlemage" architecture, launches into the exact same "sub-$300 value-for-money" graphics card segment that the A770 and A750 are already stuck in. But it's a major improvement over those cards in just about every way, and Intel has gone a long way toward fixing drivers and other issues that plagued the first Arc cards at launch. If nothing else, the B580 suggests that Intel has some staying power and that the B700-series GPUs could be genuinely exciting if Intel can get one out relatively soon.

Specs and testbed notes

The Arc B580 and Arc B570 lead the charge for the Battlemage generation. Both are based on the same GPU silicon, but the B580 has a few more execution resources, slightly higher clock speeds, a 192-bit memory bus instead of 160-bit, and 12GB of memory instead of 10GB.
Intel positions both cards as entry-level 1440p options because they have a bit more RAM than the 8GB baseline of the GeForce RTX 4060 and Radeon RX 7600. These 8GB cards are still generally fine at 1080p, but more memory does make the Arc cards feel a little more future-proof, especially since they're fast enough to actually hit 60 fps in a lot of games at 1440p.Our testbed remains largely the same as it has been for a while, though we've swapped the ASRock X670E board for an Asus model. The Ryzen 7 7800X3D remains the heart of the system, with more than enough performance to avoid bottlenecking midrange and high-end GPUs.

We haven't done extensive re-testing of most older GPUs—the GeForce and Radeon numbers here are the same ones we used in the RX 7600 XT review earlier this year. We wouldn't expect new drivers to change the scores in our games much since they're mostly a bit older—we still use a mix of DirectX 11 and DirectX 12 games, including a few with and without ray-tracing effects enabled. We have re-tested the older Arc cards with recent drivers since Intel does still occasionally make changes that can have a noticeable impact on older games.

As with the Arc A-series cards, Intel emphatically recommends that resizable BAR be enabled for your motherboard to get optimal performance. This is sometimes called Smart Access Memory or SAM, depending on your board; most AMD AM4 and 8th-gen Intel Core systems should support it after a BIOS update, and newer PCs should mostly have it on by default. Our test system had it enabled for the B580 and for all the other GPUs we tested.As a competitor to the RTX 4060, the Arc B580 is actually pretty appealing, whether you're talking about 1080p or 1440p, in games with ray-tracing on or off. Even older DirectX 11 titles in our suite, like Grand Theft Auto V and Assassin's Creed Odyssey, don't seem to take the same performance hit as they did on older Arc cards.

Intel is essentially making a slightly stronger version of the argument that AMD has been trying to make with the RX 7600. AMD's cards always come with the caveat of significantly worse performance in games with heavy ray-tracing effects, but the performance hit for Intel cards in ray-traced games looks a lot more like Nvidia's than AMD's. Playable ray-traced 1080p is well within reach for the Intel card, and in both Cyberpunk 2077 and Returnal, its performance came closer to the 8GB 4060 Ti's.The 12GB of RAM is also enough to put more space between the B580 and the 8GB versions of the 4060 and 7600. Forza Horizon 5 performs significantly better at 1440p on cards with more memory, like the B580 and the 16GB RX 7600 XT, and it's a safe bet that the 8GB limit will become more of a factor for high-end games at higher resolutions as the years go on.

We experienced just one performance anomaly in our testing. Forza Horizon 5 actually runs a bit worse with XeSS enabled, with a smooth average frame rate but frequent stutters that make it less playable overall (though it's worth noting that Forza Horizon 5 never benefits much from upscaling algorithms on any GPUs we've tested, for whatever reason). Intel also alerted us to a possible issue with Cyberpunk 2077 when enabling ray-tracing but recommended a workaround that involved pressing F1 to reset the game's settings; the benchmark ran fine on our testbed.

Power consumption is another place where the Battlemage GPU plays a lot of catch-up with Nvidia. With the caveat that software-measured power usage numbers like ours are less accurate than numbers captured with hardware tools, it looks like the B580's power consumption, when fully loaded, consumes somewhere between 120 and 130 W in Hitman and Borderlands. This is a tad higher than the 4060, but it's lower than either Radeon RX 7600.

It's not the top of the class, but looking at the A750's power consumption shows how far Intel has come—the B580 beats the A750's performance every single time while consuming about 60 W less power.Intel is explicitly targeting Nvidia's GeForce RTX 4060 with the Arc B580, a role it fills well for a low starting price. But the B580 is perhaps more damaging to AMD, which positions both of its 7600-series cards (and the remaining 6600-series stuff that's hanging around) in the same cheaper-than-Nvidia-with-caveats niche.

In fact, I'd probably recommend the B580 to a budget GPU buyer over any of the Radeon RX 7600 cards at this point. For the same street price as the RX 7600, Intel is providing better performance in most games and much better performance in ray-traced games. The 16GB 7600 XT has more RAM, but it's $90 to $100 more expensive, and a 12GB card is still reasonably future-proof and decent at 1440p.

All of that said, Intel is putting out a great competitor to the RTX 4060 and RX 7600 a year and a half after those cards both launched—and within just a few months of a possible RTX 5060. Intel is selling mid-2023's midrange GPU performance in late 2024. There are actually good arguments for building a budget gaming PC right this minute, before potential Trump-administration tariffs can affect prices or supply chains, but assuming the tech industry can maintain its normal patterns, it would be smartest to wait and see what Nvidia does next.Nvidia also has some important structural benefits. DLSS upscaling support is nearly ubiquitous in high-end games, Nvidia's drivers are more battle-tested, and it's extremely unlikely that Nvidia will decide to pull out of the GPU market and stop driver development any time soon (Intel has published a roadmap encompassing multiple GPU generations, which is reassuring, but the company's recent financial distress has seen it shed several money-losing hobby projects).

If there's a saving grace for Intel and the B580, it's that Nvidia has signaled, both through its statements and its behavior, that it's mostly uninterested in aggressively lowering GPU prices, either over time (Nvidia GPUs tend not to stray far from MSRP, barring supply issues) or between generations. An RTX 5060 is highly unlikely to be cheaper than a 4060 and could easily be more expensive. Depending on how good a hypothetical RTX 5060 is, Intel still has a lot of room to offer good performance for the price in a $200-to-$250-ish GPU market that doesn't get a ton of attention.

The other issue for Intel is that for a second straight GPU generation, the company is launching late with a part that is forced by its performance to play in a budget-oriented, low-margin area of the GPU market. I don't think I'm expecting a 4090 or 5090-killer out of Intel any time soon, but based on the B580, I'm at least a little optimistic that Intel can offer a B700-series card that can credibly compete with the likes of Nvidia's 4070-series or AMD's 7800 XT and 7900 GRE. Performance-wise, that's the current sweet spot of the GPU market, but you'll spend more than you would on a PS5 to buy most of those cards. If Intel can shake up that part of the business, it could help put Arc on the map.

The good
Solid midrange 1080p and 1440p performance at a good starting price
More RAM than the competition
Much-improved power efficiency compared to Arc A-series GPUs
Unlike the A-series, we noticed no outliers where performance was disproportionately bad
Simple, clean-looking reference design from Intel
The bad
Competing with cards that launched a year and a half ago
New Nvidia and AMD competitors are likely within a few months
Intel still can't compete at the high end of the GPU market, or even the medium-high end
The ugly
So far, Arc cards have not been successful enough to guarantee their long-term existenceErrant reference in macOS 15.2 seems to confirm M4 MacBook Airs for 2025
Software reference could point to a release sooner rather than later.The macOS 15.2 update that was released earlier today came with a handful of new features, plus something unexpected: an apparently accidental reference to the upcoming M4 MacBook Airs. MacRumors reports that the "Mac16,12" and "Mac16,13" model identifiers reference 13- and 15-inch models of the M4 Air and that both are coming in 2025.

That a MacBook Air refresh is planned for next year isn't much of a surprise at this point—in reporting that pretty much nailed the details of the first M4 Macs, Bloomberg's Mark Gurman has said that the Air, the Mac Studio, and the Mac Pro are all slated for updates throughout 2025.

But a reference in the current release of macOS could point to a launch sooner rather than later; the M4 Mac mini was referenced in a macOS update in mid-September around a month and a half before it was released. The M3 Airs came out in March this year, but Apple has been known to put out new Macs as early as January in recent years.

The M4 isn't a gigantic update over the M3—we tested its performance in the M4 iMac, though a passively cooled MacBook Air version would likely be a bit slower at heavier workloads—but the fully enabled version does come with two extra CPU cores and some nice quality-of-life updates. Those updates include Thunderbolt 5 ports and support for a total of three displays (two external and the built-in screen), up from a total of two for the M1, M2, and M3 MacBook Airs.

We didn't get M4 MacBook Airs in November, but Apple did "update" the M2 and M3 versions from 8GB to 16GB of RAM without increasing their prices. The RAM increase will be useful for all kinds of things, though it could be a harbinger of increased memory requirements for upcoming Apple Intelligence features.

iOS 18.2, macOS 15.2 updates arrive today with image and emoji generation
Nearly 3 months in, Apple has added most of the initial Intelligence features.Apple has announced that it will be releasing the iOS 18.2, iPadOS 18.2, and macOS Sequoia 15.2 updates to the public later this afternoon, following weeks of beta testing for developers and users. As with iOS 18.1, the headlining features are new additions to Apple Intelligence, mainly the image-generation capabilities: Image Playground for general images, and "Genmoji" for making custom images in the style of Apple's built-in Unicode-based emoji characters.

Other AI features include "Image Wand," which will take sketched images from the Notes app and turn them into a "polished image" using context clues from other notes; and ChatGPT integration for the Writing Tools feature.The updates also include a long list of bug fixes and security updates, for those who don't care about Apple Intelligence. Safari gets better data importing and exporting support, an HTTPS Priority feature that "upgrades URLs to HTTPS whenever possible," and a download status indicator for iPhones with a Dynamic Island. Mail in iOS offers to automatically sort messages to bring important ones to the top of your inbox. There are also various tweaks and improvements for the Photos, Podcasts, Voice Memos, and Stocks apps, while the Weather app in macOS can optionally display the weather in your menu bar.The Image Playground, Genmoji, and ChatGPT features mostly round out the first wave of Apple Intelligence features announced at WWDC over the summer. None of these AI-powered updates were available in the initial iOS 18 or macOS 15 upgrades, but a handful (including notification summaries) were enabled in 18.1/15.1.

There are still a few Apple Intelligence updates slated for "the months to come." These include Siri improvements that will allow it "to draw on a user’s personal context to deliver intelligence that’s tailored to them," plus additional third-party integrations and the ability to make context-aware suggestions based on the current contents of your screen (something Google has been playing with in Android for many years). Priority Notifications and a "sketch" style for Image Playgrounds are also coming in a later update.

As for Apple's plans beyond that, the company is allegedly working on a more conversational Siri powered by a large language model, but reports suggest Apple won't be ready to talk about it until sometime next year.

All Apple Intelligence features require relatively recent iPhones, iPads, and Macs. For the iPad and Mac, you need a model with an M-series Apple Silicon processor. Apple Intelligence will only work on last year's iPhone 15 Pro or one of this year's iPhone 16 or iPhone 16 Pro models.Raspberry Pi 500 makes an 8GB Pi 5 into a compact, inexpensive desktop PC
New Pi 5-powered PC also launches with optional portable 1080p monitor.One of the selling points of the Raspberry Pi 5 (released in October 2023) is that it was fast enough and had enough memory to be a credible general-purpose desktop PC, if not an especially fast one. For Pi-as-desktop enthusiasts, the company has a couple of new pre-holiday announcements. The biggest is the Raspberry Pi 500, which fits the components of an 8GB Pi 5 into a small keyboard-shaped case for $90.

It's a follow-up to the original Raspberry Pi 400, and like that system, it takes the components from the regular Pi 5 board and puts them on a different PCB with all of the ports positioned in a single row across the back of the device. It includes one USB 2.0 port, two USB 3.0 ports, a microSD slot, two micro HDMI ports, the 40-pin GPIO header, and a gigabit Ethernet port.

In addition to the standalone $90 system, the Pi 500 will also be sold as part of a Desktop Kit with a mouse, power supply, HDMI cable, and printed Beginner's Guide booklet for $120.If there's a major downside to the Pi 500 as a desktop PC, it's that there isn't an easy way to add an M.2 slot for faster storage since existing M.2 HATs for the regular Pi 5 can't be connected to a Pi 500. Pi enthusiast and YouTuber Jeff Geerling's teardown of the device reveals that there's space on the Pi 500 board that seems to be specifically set aside for an M.2 slot and NVMe SSDs, but the slot isn't populated, and simply soldering one down isn't enough to enable M.2 support. It may come in a later and/or more expensive version of the Pi 500. Out of the box, you'll be limited to microSD media or storage connected to one of the USB ports.The other addition to the Pi lineup is an official Raspberry Pi Monitor, a $100 15.6-inch 1080p IPS screen with built-in speakers and a white-and-red color scheme that compliments the Pi 500 and the official Pi 5 enclosure. The monitor has a foldable kickstand but also includes VESA mounting holes if you want to give it a more permanent stand.

The monitor is powered via USB-C but needs a separate HDMI input for video—it doesn't look like it's capable of doing power and video over a single cable, though this isn't something the Pi supports anyway. If you power the monitor via one of the Pi's USB ports, the brightness is limited to 60 percent of maximum and speaker volume is limited to 50 percent. A dedicated USB-C power supply is required to enable full brightness and volume.

The Pi 400 isn't going away. Raspberry Pi CEO Eben Upton says the older Pi PC is getting a small price drop, from $70 to $60. A kit with a mouse, power supply, HDMI cable, SD card, and printed manual is being dropped from $100 to $80. For the extra performance, RAM, and other capabilities you get from the Pi 5, the Pi 500 is probably worth paying a little extra for. But as an ultra-budget option for projects that don't need the extra power, the price drop is a nice touch.Microsoft discontinues lackadaisically updated Surface Studio all-in-one desktop
This expensive all-in-one's unique screen was the only thing going for it.Microsoft has formally discontinued its Surface Studio all-in-one desktop, the company confirmed to Windows Central, a $4,300 touchscreen PC that the company updated with new components twice in the space of eight years. Windows Central reports that there are currently no plans for a follow-up to the Surface Studio and that a Surface Studio 3 may have been among the casualties of cutbacks to Microsoft's Surface lineup.

Like the Surface Laptop Studio, the desktop's claim to fame was a unique hinge design for its screen, which could reposition it to make it easier to draw on with the Surface Pen. But the desktop's high cost and its perennially outdated internal components made it a less appealing machine than it could have been.

The first version of the Surface Studio desktop debuted in late 2016. As the company's first desktop PC, it used the same basic design as the current version and was praised for its high-quality screen and unique hinge. But the first Surface Studio of the machine had some of the same issues that the desktop would always have: a high starting price and relatively outdated and underpowered components compared to other desktop systems.The longest-lived Studio desktop was the Surface Studio 2, which was released in 2018 and wasn't replaced until a revised Surface Studio 2+ was announced in late 2022. It used an even higher-quality display panel, but it still used previous-generation internal components. This might not have been so egregious if Microsoft had updated it more consistently, but this model went untouched for so long that Microsoft had to lower Windows 11's system requirements specifically to cover the Studio 2 so that the company wouldn't be ending support for a PC that it was still actively selling.

The Studio 2+ was the desktop's last hurrah, and despite jumping two GPU generations and four CPU generations, it still didn't use the latest components available at the time. Again, more consistent updates like the ones Microsoft provides for the Surface Pro and Surface Laptop could have made this less of a problem, but the Studio 2+ once again sat untouched for two years after being updated.

The Studio desktop's unique screen and hinge endeared it to some artists, and for those users, there's no immediately obvious replacement for this machine. But the all-in-one's high price and its specs always made it a hard sell for anyone else. A lack of wide appeal usually leads to mediocre sales, and mediocre sales usually lead to discontinued products. So it goes.