AI helps ID paint chemistry of Berlin Wall murals
Italian scientists designed a neural network to analyze spectral data from handheld Raman spectroscopy devices. 
The fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1989 was a seminal moment in 20th century history, paving the way for German reunification.  Many segments, both large and small, were preserved for posterity—including portions covered in graffiti or murals.  A team of Italian scientists used a combination of spectroscopic analysis and machine learning to study paint chips from wall fragments to learn more about the chemistry of the paints and pigments used, according to a new paper published in the Journal of the American Chemical Society,

There has been increased attention in recent years over preserving street art, which is vulnerable both to degradation over time as well as deliberate vandalism.  For instance, in 2021, Italian chemists figured out how to use hydrogels to remove added graffiti from vandalized murals in Florence.  (Over-painting by vandals is so chemically similar to the original painting underneath that it is difficult to selectively remove just the over-painting without damaging the original. ) Unlike most classic masterpieces of the past, created with paints designed to last centuries, street art is more ephemeral in nature, using materials that lack such longevity. 

In many cases, like the Berlin Wall, the painters didn't bother to document the specific materials they used, their application techniques, or other useful information that conservators could use to restore or conserve street art.   Modern painting materials are also much more complex, and manufacturers typically do not report specific information on the composition of those materials. 
"Each product is a mixture of various components: Pigments and dyes give the color; solvents allow the mixture either to flow through the nozzle of spray or to be spread with a brush," Francesco Armetta of the University of Palermo and co-authors wrote in their paper.  "The binders serve to hold the mixture together and allow it to adhere to the surface on which it is spread; emulsifiers, antioxidants, biocides, plasticizers, and other components are added to improve specific properties. "
Nondestructive techniques like Raman spectroscopy are often used to identify the molecular signatures of pigments, dyes, and other chemical compounds, but this usually requires bringing samples to the lab.  Handheld Raman devices are used for cases where analysis must be done on-site, but they are far less precise than full-sized laboratory equipment.  So Armetta et al.  decided to adopt a machine learning approach to enhance the precision and sensitivity of spectral data collected by those handheld devices. 

The team collected 15 pictorial fragments of five different colors from Berlin Wall paintings.  They used handheld Raman spectroscopy on the paint chips and compared that spectral data to a commercial library of pigment spectra, confirming those findings with X-ray fluorescence and and optical fiber reflectance spectroscopy. 

Most of the fragments had two top layers that had been painted with a brush rather than spray paint; brushstrokes were clearly visible under a microscope in several cases.  The underlying third layer, in contact with the masonry, was white and probably used to prepare the surface for painting. 

Calcium and titanium were the most abundant elements in all the samples.  Chromium and lead were present in a green-colored sample, and the authors think this was mixed with another color to get that particular shade.  There were also traces of copper in blue and green samples. 

Armetta et al.  also created their own mock-up samples by mixing commercial German acrylic paints (commonly used since the 1800s) in different ratios to try and match colors and tints from the fragments—crucial information for restoration.  This is where their machine learning algorithm (dubbed SAPNet) proved useful.  They trained it on the Raman spectral data from the Berlin Wall samples and used it to determine the percentage ofWe’ve got a lavish new trailer for Star Trek: Section 31
"Whatever you believe your mission was, it's worse than you thought. "
We've got a shiny new trailer for Star Trek: Section 31, the long-awaited spinoff film that brings back Michelle Yeoh's magnificent Phillipa Georgiou from Star Trek: Discovery.  The film will give us the backstory for Georgiou's evil Mirror Universe counterpart, where she was a despotic emperor who murdered millions of her own people. 

As previously reported, Yeoh's stylishly acerbic Georgiou was eventually written out of Discovery, but fans took hope from rumors of a spinoff series featuring the character.  That turned into a spinoff film, and we'll take it.  Miku Martineau plays a young Phillipa Georgiou in the film.  Meanwhile, Yeoh's older Georgiou is tasked with protecting the United Federation of Planets as part of a black ops group called Section 31, while dealing with all the blood she's spilled in her past. 
Any hardcore Star Trek fan will tell you that Section 31 was first introduced as an urban legend of sorts in Star Trek: Deep Space Nine.  Apparently Ira Steven Behr—who came up with the idea of a secret rogue organization within Starfleet doing shady things to protect the Federation—took inspiration from Commander Sisko's comment in one episode about how "It's easy to be a saint in paradise. " The name is taken from Starfleet Charter Article 14, Section 31, which allows Starfleet to take extraordinary measures in the face of extreme threats—including sabotage, assassination, and even biological warfare. pigment.  The model concluded that the Berlin Wall paint chips contained titanium white and as much as 75 percent pigment. 
Paramount+ dropped a teaser at San Diego Comic-Con in July that opened with a flashback to the young Philippa, musing via voiceover about how an emperor "can only be loyal to duty" to ensure that the empire stays strong.  But the rest was largely devoted to Yeoh swanning about in fabulous outfits while her fellow secret agents told her what a "bad bitch" she is.  "Somebody's got to keep it lively, right?" Georgiou smirked. 

We don't learn much about the plot in this new trailer, but we do get an eyeful of the snazzy casino-type setting on the space station where Georgiou has set up operations, as well as a glimpse of the Cheron, an alien species from The Original Series who are black on one side, white on the other.  Georgiou is recruited to join Section 31.  Apparently the Federation faces "a threat unlike anything Starfleet's ever seen. " (I bet they say that to all the former evil empresses. ) Billions of lives are at stake, and the Section 31 team must band together to save the day—with a bit of oversight from Starfleet to ensure they don't, like, commit murder or something.  Cue fight scenes, big explosions, spaceships in distress, and other classic Star Trek tropes. 
Paleolithic deep-cave compound likely used for rituals
A boulder engraved with a turtle, good acoustics, and torch lighting—what more do you need for a good time?
Archaeologists excavating a paleolithic cave site in Galilee, Israel, have found evidence that a deep-cave compound at the site may have been used for ritualistic gatherings, according to a new paper published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS).  That evidence includes the presence of a symbolically carved boulder in a prominent placement, and well as the remains of what may have been torches used to light the interior.  And the acoustics would have been conducive to communal gatherings. 

Dating back to the Early Upper Paleolithic period, Manot Cave was found accidentally when a bulldozer broke open its roof during construction in 2008.  Archaeologists soon swooped in and recovered such artifacts as stone tools, bits of charcoal, remains of various animals, and a nearly complete human skull. 

The latter proved to be especially significant, as subsequent analysis showed that the skull (dubbed Manot 1) had both Neanderthal and modern features and was estimated to be about 54,700 years old.  That lent support to the hypothesis that modern humans co-existed and possibly interbred with Neanderthals during a crucial transition period in the region, further bolstered by genome sequencing. 

The Manot Cave features an 80-meter-long hall connecting to two lower chambers from the north and south.  The living section is near the entrance and was a hub for activities like flint-knapping, butchering animals, eating, and other aspects of daily life.  But about eight stories below, there is a large cavern consisting of a high gallery and an adjoining smaller "hidden" chamber separated from the main area by a cluster of mineral deposits called speleothems. 
That's the area that is the subject of the new PNAS paper.  Unlike the main living section, the authors found no evidence of daily human activities in this compound, suggesting it served another purpose—most likely ritual gatherings. 
Among the more interesting discoveries was a large engraved dolomite boulder, positioned in a niche along a back cave wall.  The etchings resembled a turtle and date back between 35-37,000 years ago.  It's the only engraved stone in the cave, and the marks are distinctive, unlike natural erosion features elsewhere in the compound.  The marks are consistent with being made with a sharp flint tool.  The authors even replicated the marks on a similarly sized dolomite boulder retrieved from the cave using different kinds of rudimentary tools.  Tortoise remains are common finds at such sites from the Middle Paleolithic period onward, including at the Manot Cave. 

There is ample evidence that prehistoric cave dwellers used various lighting sources to illuminate cave interiors.  In 2021, for instance, we reported on how a team of Spanish scientists conducted in situ experiments with three different kinds of Paleolithic lighting sources in the hopes of discovering what those various illumination methods might tell us about the emergence of "human symbolic and artistic behavior" in the form of cave art.  That team conducted their experiments at the Isuntza 1 Cave in Spain's Basque country. 

The Manot Cave authors found similar evidence of illumination in the deep cave compound, specifically traces of burnt organic material near a stalagmite.  "Since no remnants of hearths were uncovered within the ritual compound, it is assumed that the use of fire was likely in the form of a portable source, such as torches or ephemeral short-lived fireplaces that did not leave behind preserved traces," the authors wrote.  "These means of lighting would produce less smoke and gas"—an important consideration given the depth of the cave and likely lack of good ventilation. 

Finally, the authors performed acoustical measurements at various locations in the deep cave compound and found that the reverberation times were within modern standards for classrooms.  So the area would have allowed for "comfortable conversations and listening. " Select animal remains are also often associated with ritual spaces.  While animal remains from butchering activities were absent, there was a complete antler from a fallow deer that may have had a symbolic purpose. 
Latest James Webb data hints at new physics in Universe’s expansion
These latest findings further support the Hubble Space Telescope's prior expansion rate measurements. 
Physicists have been puzzling over conflicting observational results pertaining to the accelerating expansion rate of our Universe—a major discovery recognized by the 2011 Nobel Prize in Physics.  New observational data from the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) has confirmed that prior measurements of distances between nearby stars and galaxies made by the Hubble Space Telescope are not in error, according to a new paper published in The Astrophysical Journal.  That means the discrepancy between observation and our current theoretical model of the Universe is more likely to be due to new physics. 

As previously reported, the Hubble Constant is a measure of the Universe's expansion expressed in units of kilometers per second per megaparsec (Mpc).  So, each second, every megaparsec of the Universe expands by a certain number of kilometers.  Another way to think of this is in terms of a relatively stationary object a megaparsec away: Each second, it gets a number of kilometers more distant. 

How many kilometers? That's the problem here.  There are basically three methods scientists use to measure the Hubble Constant: looking at nearby objects to see how fast they are moving, gravitational waves produced by colliding black holes or neutron stars, and measuring tiny deviations in the afterglow of the Big Bang known as the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB).  However, the various methods have come up with different values.  For instance, tracking distant supernovae produced a value of 73 km/s Mpc, while measurements of the CMB using the Planck satellite produced a value of 67 km/s Mpc. 



"The identification of most of the components of the fragments was only possible through the comprehensive evaluation of the results provided by all the techniques [combined]," the authors concluded, further augmented by the development of SAPNet.  "While SAPNet was specifically tailored for pigment mixture analysis, its robust framework demonstrates the transformative potential of deep learning methodologies for Raman spectral analysis across diverse scientific and industrial applications. "
Just last year, researchers made a third independent measure of the Universe's expansion by tracking the behavior of a gravitationally lensed supernova, where the distortion in space-time caused by a massive object acts as a lens to magnify an object in the background.  The best fits of those models all ended up slightly below the value of the Hubble Constant derived from the CMB, with the difference being within the statistical error.  Values closer to those derived from measurements of other supernovae were a considerably worse fit for the data.  The method was new, with considerable uncertainties, but it did provide an independent means of getting at the Hubble Constant. 
Earlier this year, JWST researchers reported on measurements built on last year's confirmation based on Webb data that Hubble's measurements of the expansion rate were accurate, at least for the first few "rungs" of the "cosmic distance ladder. " But there was still the possibility of as-yet-undetected errors that might increase the deeper (and hence further back in time) one looked into the Universe, particularly for brightness measurements of more distant stars. 
Additional observations of Cepheid variable stars—a total of 1,000 in five host galaxies as far out as 130 million light-years—correlated with the Hubble data helped JWST see past the interstellar dust that has made Hubble's own images of those stars more blurry and overlapping.  This enabled astronomers to more easily distinguish between individual stars.  Those results further confirmed the accuracy of the Hubble data and allowed astronomers to rule out measurement error with a high degree of confidence. 

A critical cross-check
This latest study serves as a critical cross-check to the April paper, using three different measurements to determine distances to galaxies known to be hosts to supernovae.  "Cross-checking Hubble might sound prosaic, but the Hubble results demonstrate a profound tension in the Universe between how fast it is expanding now (measured by Hubble) versus the prediction from the standard model, LambdaCDM (calibrated by the Cosmic Microwave Background)," lead author Adam Riess, of the Space Science Telescope Institute at Johns Hopkins University, told Ars.  "So Webb confirming Hubble means we are really seeing something amiss in the Universe. "

The new study, which includes data from two independent groups working to refine the Hubble constant, encompasses about a third of the full galaxy sample collected by Hubble.  The authors used the distance to the galaxy NGC-4258 (aka Messier 106) as a reference point, since that distance is known.  They used pulsating stars known as Cepheid variables to calculate distances and cross-checked their work with complementary distance measurements based on carbon-rich stars and red giants.  They ended up with a Hubble constant value of 72. 6 km/s/Mpc, very close to Hubble's value of 72. 8 km/s/Mpc. 


Now it's up to the theorists to come up with novel hypotheses to explain these findings.  “One possible explanation for the Hubble tension would be if there was something missing in our understanding of the early Universe, such as a new component of matter—early dark energy—that gave the universe an unexpected kick after the Big Bang,” said JHU cosmologist Marc Kamionkowski, who was not involved in the new study.  “And there are other ideas, like funny dark matter properties, exotic particles, changing electron mass, or primordial magnetic fields that may do the trick.  Theorists have license to get pretty creative. ”

As for how these new results compare to the 2023 measurements made using supernovae, "That result is based on a different and far more indirect route," said Riess.  "We are measuring distances and redshifts, which is a direct measure of how fast the Universe is expanding.  The [2023] measurement is based on modeling a phenomenon called strong lensing (seeing multiple images) determining where the intervening mass is.  A byproduct of that is an estimate of the Hubble constant, but the result is rather imprecise, formally not inconsistent with the present work or any past work. "
Prime Video released a one-minute teaser for its fantasy series The Wheel of Time at CCXP24 in Sao Paulo, Brazil.  The series is adapted from the late Robert Jordan's bestselling 14-book series of epic fantasy novels, and Ars has been following it closely with regular recaps through the first two seasons.  Judging from the new teaser, the battle between light and dark is heating up as the Dragon Reborn comes into his power. 

(Spoilers for first two seasons below. )

As previously reported, the series centers on Moiraine (played by Oscar-nominee Rosamund Pike), a member of a powerful, all-woman organization called the Aes Sedai.  Magic, known as the One Power, is divided into male (saidin) and female (saidar) flavors.  The latter is the province of the Aes Sedai.  Long ago, a great evil, called the Dark One, caused the saidin to become tainted, such that most men who show an ability to channel that magic go mad.  It's the job of the Aes Sedai to track down such men and strip them of their abilities—a process known as "gentling" that, unfortunately, is often anything but.  There is also an ancient prophecy concerning the Dragon Reborn: the reincarnation of a person who will save or destroy humanity. 


In S1, Moiraine befriended a group of five young people—Egwene, Nynaeve, Rand, Mat, and Perrin—whose small village has been attacked by monsters called Trollocs, suspecting that one of the young men might be the prophesied Dragon Reborn.  She was right: the Dragon Reborn is Rand al'Thor (Josha Stradowski), whose identity was revealed to all in the S2 finale.  That second season was largely based on story elements from Jordan's The Great Hunt and The Dragon Reborn.  We don't yet know which specific books will provide source material for S3, but per the official premise:
The atmospheric teaser remarks on how "the world is changing" as the shadow's roots begin to take hold.  And Moraine has an ominous warning.  "I have seen a thousand thousand futures," she says.  "In every future where I lived, Rand dies.  And the only way he lives is if I don't. "

The third season of The Wheel of Time premieres on Prime Video on March 13, 2025.